Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to talk about where we go from here.
And what I mean is we need to address the very notion of what a theme is or what it can be or what it
should be in this new era of full site editing and block themes to explain the issues I'm trying to
discuss here, let's talk a bit more about the default 2022 theme.
So let's just open up that theme in our text editor.
So in your WordPress installation folder, go into WP content themes and then here's the 2022 folder.
Just open this up in your text editor.
So if we dig in to the templates folder and then open up maybe indexed HTML, we see that the only thing
in this file is default core WordPress blocks.
Now before we go any further in this lesson and I discuss my own personal philosophy of WordPress,
I want to get it out of the way and say that there's nothing wrong with this approach.
Yes, it may not align with the way that I use WordPress and it may not align with the way that my non
developer clients want to use WordPress, but that's just a matter of personal preference.
So I want to acknowledge that for a sizable percentage of people, this approach of using WordPress
as a page builder tool using the core blocks, this will be wonderful.
And if these are the types of themes that you want to create, that's amazing.
I think there will be plenty of people interested in using those types of themes.
However, you don't need any guidance on how to create these types of themes.
There's really nothing to learn.
It's not as if the complexity of PHP is now gone and it's been replaced with tons of JavaScript complexity.
There's really just no complexity of any variety.
Now in these types of themes, you can dig through every file in this folder.
You're really not going to find any PHP, any HTML, any access or any JavaScript.
It's literally just core default block comments and then maybe the teeny tiny bit of HTML that that
block would output.
Now, again, I'm not suggesting that that's bad.
It's not it's quite the opposite.
I think this 2022 theme is amazing.
My point is that it's simply not the type of theme that needs lessons and chapters explaining how to
build it.
You just jump into the WordPress editor and start combining different blocks together, providing a
few intelligently chosen default values, both in the blocks themselves and in the themed JSON file.
Don't worry, we'll cover this file as we build our block theme together.
But that's really it if you're just trying to build a theme like this.
In fact, the majority of the lines of code in this theme actually live in the ANC or includes folder
and then inside this patterns folder.
So what in the world are block patterns?
Well, they're really just like presets for blocks.
Or you can think of them sort of as like a tab trigger snippet in your text editor pattern is just a
preset way of arranging blocks, but that's it.
There's nothing custom going on.
It's just more default core WordPress blocks just arranged and combined in a certain way.
If you've never seen a block pattern before, let me show you how they work right now.
And the reason I want to show you this is because this is really a lot of the heavy lifting that the
2022 theme is doing.
So even if we forget about this 2022 theme for a moment and we just think about WordPress itself.
So for example, we have this really basic empty theme that we created in the previous video, and you
and I definitely have not registered any custom block patterns yet.
So even in this theme, if we go in to edit a blog post or page maybe below this paragraph, if I try
to add in a new block, if I use this tool so instead of blocks, you can look under patterns.
So WordPress by default has different patterns you can choose from.
So if you scroll through this list, you'll see all sorts of different patterns and we didn't register
any custom ones.
These just exist in WordPress.
So image on solid color with description you can click that and nothing magical just happened.
It simply added in those blocks.
So the HTML comments and a few preset values, it added it right into our post.
And now when WordPress saves this, so if I click update to actually save that into the database, there's
nothing dynamic or interesting going on.
It doesn't have a reference that that's the pattern we used.
It's literally just storing the HTML for these blocks so there's no longer any connection between this
and the pattern that created it.
So for example, here's the database entry for that post.
Here's the post content field.
So there's the paragraph.
And then if you scroll down, this is the code that the pattern inserted into the content and there's
no reference to the pattern that, you know, the preset that inserted it.
It's just the actual blocks that you would use the.
Columns.
BLOCK the cover block.
Is that a big deal?
Is that a problem?
Well, I don't know.
That's for you to decide.
I would never use this approach, because now if a client used that pattern in 700 different posts or
pages, there's no way for us as the developer to make a tiny adjustment to it in one place and have
all 700 posts use the new updates.
Right.
As soon as you insert a pattern like this.
You are completely married to the output, maybe for the types of websites you and your clients are
building.
That's not a problem.
That's really up to you to decide.
The reason I bring this up is just to let you know that that's really most of the heavy lifting that
the 2022 theme is doing.
So it's registering a bunch.
So if you scroll through here, a bunch of, you know, new block patterns.
So you can click through them and look at what each one is doing.
But really, I'll give you a summary.
It's just inserting core WordPress blocks in a certain way.
So let's get back to the actual point of this video.
If this is the approach you're interested in, if you want to build a theme similar to 2022, cool.
Congrats, you don't really need to learn anything else.
You can close this video right now and just start experimenting in the WordPress editor screen.
Right, because that's really all that's going on in every one of these files.
However, and this is really the entire point of this video, if you're anything like me, you might
be thinking to yourself, Hey, I don't want to be 100% married to the core WordPress blocks or Hey,
I don't want to be 100% married to the WordPress design system and the c est that it outputs, right?
What if you want to use bootstrap or tailwind?
CC or what if you want to use sass and write your own success?
In those cases, you would need to be in control of the HTML structure that's being used.
Or Hey, I need to be able to query for complex relationships based on meta values or other certain
conditions, and the query loop block just isn't going to cut it.
Or perhaps the biggest concern of all.
Hey, what if my website is going to have 2000 pages or 5000 pages?
And what if I don't want every single piece of content on my site to be mixed together with presentation
with zero separation between data and design?
And what if I have these 5000 pages and I want to change the HTML that a certain block type uses?
I don't want to have to go into all 5000 pages manually and hit the update button 5000 times.
I just want to be able to update a code file once and have all 5000 posts use my newest code.
Well, the good news is that is possible using a modern block based approach.
But you do need to set things up in a particular way that might not seem super intuitive at first.
Anyways, if you've had any of these thoughts, it means that you can't, at least not 100% follow the
2022 theme approach of exclusively using core blocks and built in style options.
Right.
We need to take matters into our own hands a bit if we don't want to be completely restricted to WordPress
managing all HTML and CC for us.
So where do we get started?
Well, we're building a block theme.
So let's start breaking down our website in terms of blocks.
Remember, our goal was to convert the fictional university theme into a modern block based theme.
So right now, let me go ahead and switch back to the traditional fictional university theme.
So under appearance, let me switch back to fictional university.
So this is not a block theme.
This is a traditional theme.
And remember, our goal together, step by step, is to convert this into a block theme.
So what should our first step be?
Well, let's just start breaking this design up into blocks.
So I think our first step should be to turn this top banner area into its own block.
So this banner block will not include this content, the navigation and the logo.
It will just be the background image and this text and button content here.
I think this will be a good first block to build.
The idea is that we want this content to be very easy to edit.
So we're going to take full advantage of the modern editor.
The block based approach that what you see is what you get click and type approach, and it should be
a great bit of practice.
Now before we jump into that, I do want to say that I'm well aware you could create this layout and
design using the core default WordPress blocks, right through a combination of the WordPress cover
block and the headline block and the buttons block.
You could create something that looks very, very similar to this, but that's not the point.
The point is, what if you had a really complex and custom bespoke design?
Something that was way more complicated than this in terms of visual design.
The point is, how would you turn that into your own block?
Right.
If you don't want to use the word press corps blocks, sometimes you need to take matters into your
own hands.
So don't worry so much about the way that this looks, because this does look simplistic in terms of
visual design.
We're focused on how to take matters into our own hands, and that's exactly what we're going to learn
how to do in the next lesson.
I think it's going to be a ton of fun to start this journey of converting this theme into a modern block
theme.
So let's keep our momentum rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.